x3270 Build and Install Instructions

Vanilla X11R5 or X11R6

x3270 was developed on a Sun workstation running SunOS 4.1.3_U1 and MIT X11R5.
It is set up to build and install without modifications under any complete
X11R5 or X11R6 implementation.

A "complete" R5 or R6 implementation means that xmkmf and imake are configured
and installed on your system, and that the Xaw and Xmu libraries and header
files are installed. Some vendors (HP and IBM in particular) consider these
optional software and do not always install them.

If you are running vanilla X11R5 or X11R6, then the build procedure is:

    xmkmf               # create a Makefile
    make depend         # add dependency information
    make                # build x3270 and its fonts

x3270 prefers that its fonts be installed in order to run. However, a script is
provided for testing a local copy of x3270 in the current directory:

    ./dryrun            # test x3270

Once you are satisfied that x3270 is working, you can install it (as root) with
the command:

    make install

Before running x3270, you will also need to (once):

    xset fp rehash

That's the easy way. Here are the exceptions:

Vanilla X11R4

If you are running MIT X11R4 (subject to the same definition of "completeness"
above), the build procedure is almost as simple:

    mv Imakefile.R4 Imakefile   # use the R4 Imakefile instead
    xmkmf                       # create a Makefile
    make depend                 # add dependency information
    make                        # build x3270 and its fonts

x3270 prefers that its fonts be installed in order to run. However, a script is
provided for testing a local copy of x3270 in the current directory:

    ./dryrun            # test x3270

Once you are satisfied that x3270 is working, you can install it (as root) with
the command:

    make install

Before running x3270, you will also need to (once):

    xset fp rehash

IBM RS/6000, AIX 3.2, X11R5

AIX X11R5 does not include does not include xmkmf or imake, but it includes the
source code for them. If these have not been built and installed on your system
(e.g., if there is no such file as "/usr/bin/X11/imake"), you must first build
and install them by following the instructions in /usr/lpp/X11/Xamples/README.

Once these have been installed, you can use the standard X11R5 build procedure
above.

IBM RS/6000, AIX 3.2, X11R4

AIX X11R4 does not include the Xaw libraries by default, and it does not
include xmkmf at all. If the "Xample" clients and libraries have not been
installed on your system (e.g., if there is no such file as
"/usr/bin/X11/imake"), you must first build and install them by following the
instructions in /usr/lpp/X11/Xamples/README.

Once these have been installed, you can use a simple variation on the R4 build
procedure:

    mv Imakefile.R4 Imakefile   # use the R4 Imakefile instead
    imake -DUseInstalled -I/usr/lpp/X11/Xamples/config  # replacement for xmkmf
    make depend                 # add dependency information
    make                        # build x3270 and its fonts

x3270 prefers that its fonts be installed in order to run. However, a script is
provided for testing a local copy of x3270 in the current directory:

    ./dryrun            # test x3270

Once you are satisfied that x3270 is working, you can install it (as root) with
the command:

    make install

Before running x3270, you will also need to (once):

    xset fp rehash

HP-UX A9.01, X11R5

HP's X11R5 distribution does not include the Xaw libraries or header files. As
HP's X man page says,

     A number of unsupported core MIT clients and miscellaneous utilities
     are provided in /usr/contrib/bin. In addition, the entire core MIT
     distribution, compiled for Hewlett-Packard platforms, can be obtained
     from HP's users group INTERWORKS for a nominal fee. See the release
     notes for details.

What you need is the Xaw and Xmu libraries, imake, and xmkmf. Then you can
follow the vanilla R5 build and install instructions.

Sun Solaris 2.3 or 2.4, OpenWindows 3.3 or 3.4

Follow the instructions for Vanilla X11R5, with the following two changes.

Sun's 'xmkmf' configuration puts some compiler flags in the Makefile that are
specific to Sun's unbundled C compiler. If you are using a different C compiler
such as gcc, you may get a number of harmless, but annoying error messages
while compiling. To eliminate these, use the command:

    make "CDEBUGFLAGS=-O" "CCOPTIONS=-DSYSV -DSVR4"

'xmkmf' also gets the path of the 'install' program wrong. To install x3270,
you must use the command:

    make INSTALL=/usr/ucb/install install

Sun SunOS 4.1.x, OpenWindows 3.0, 3.1, or 3.2

Sun OpenWindows under SunOS uses a proprietary font format that renders
standard Imakefiles useless. A special Makefile is included in the x3270
distribution to handle this. (NOTE: The special Makefile must be run with Sun
make; Gnu make will not work).

To build x3270:

    make -f Makefile.openwin

If you get the following undefineds:

   _get_wmShellWidgetClass
   _get_applicationShellWidgetClass

This is a bug in Sun's X11 libraries, and can be corrected by obtaining patches
100512-02 and 100573-03 from Sun. As a short-term workaround, there is a line
in Makefile.openwin which you can uncomment.

Note: When the fonts are being compiled, the "bldfamily" program will produce
output lines that look like:

    * 3270                 ./3270.ff (Encoding: unknown)

These "unknown" messages are harmless.

x3270 prefers that its fonts be installed in order to run. However, a script is
provided for testing a local copy of x3270 in the current directory:

    ./dryrun            # test x3270

To install:

    make -f Makefile.openwin install

Before running x3270, you will also need to (once):

    xset fp rehash

SunOS 4.1.x, OpenWindows 2

OpenWindows 2 does not include the the Athena Widgets (Xaw) or Xmu libraries,
so x3270 cannot be built under it.

Systems Based on System V, Release 4

Before running xmkmf, you must uncomment a line in the Imakefile to include the
network libraries:

  EXTRA_LIBRARIES = -lnsl -lsocket

Mixed X Environments

If you are running a mixture of X environments, such as running a Sun XNews
server but using X11R5 libraries and header files, the supplied Imakefile may
not work properly, because it assumes that your server and libraries are of the
same type. This is not an impossible situation, just a difficult one. It
generally means that you will have to build and install the fonts separately,
perhaps even by hand.

Some tools are available to help. If you need to build fonts for an XNews (Sun
OpenWindows) server, but otherwise are using X11R4 or X11R5 libaries to build
x3270, you can build and install OpenWindows fonts separately with the
commands:

    make -f Makefile.openwin fonts
    make -f Makefile.openwin install.fonts

Building Fonts for X Terminals

The Imakefile that comes with x3270 assumes that you plan to run the x3270
client on the same workstation as your X server. Therefore it builds fonts for
that kind of X server. Compiled fonts (.snf or .pcf files) are not compatible
between different servers, so if you run x3270 with its display somewhere else
(such as on an X Terminal), you will need to compile the fonts for that server.
It is impossible to give comprehensive instructions here; however, here is an
outline for how to do it:

     Copy all of the .bdf files from the x3270 distribution into a new
     directory, say XXX.

     cd into XXX.

     For each .bdf file, run the server-specific version of bdftosnf to create
     a .snf file. For example, for to build an NCD font on a Sun-4, the command
     is:

             /usr/local/NCD/binSun4/bdftosnf 3270.bdf >3270.snf

     Run the server-specific version of mkfontdir. For example:

             /usr/local/NCD/binSun4/mkfontdir .

     Then tell your X server to use this directory:

             xset fp+ XXX
             xset fp rehash

SCO Open Desktop 3

You will need to edit a few files in order to build under SCO Open Desktop 3.

In globals.h, remove the "#define NO_SYS_TIME_H" that is defined for sco.

In Imakefile, add:

        EXTRA_LIBRARIES = -lnsl_s -lsocket

Also be aware that x3270 requires the Athena Widgets library, which is
available from sosco.sco.com.

Using an app-defaults File

Earlier versions of x3270 required a separate app-defaults file. The
app-defaults file contains definitions for options, text strings, fonts,
colors, etc. The file allows x3270 to be reconfigured without recompiling by
simply editing the file.

Unfortunately, using an app-defaults file is a pain. The mechanism for finding
the file is so flexible as to be almost incomprehensible, and it is difficult
to run the program without doing a full installation, requiring root access to
your system. Also, the app-defaults file generally changes whenever the program
changes, and making sure that x3270 finds the correct app-defaults file
compounds the above problems.

Starting with version 3.1.0.0, x3270 no longer uses a separate app-defaults
file. Instead, the file is compiled into x3270 itself. If however, you prefer
to have a separate app-defaults file, you can compile x3270 to use it.

First, you must decide whether you want app-defaults for a color display or a
monochrome display. The default is color; if you want monochrome app-defaults
you must edit Imakefile or Makefile.openwin (depending on which you are using)
and un-comment the line under the comment "Rule for building a separate
app-defaults file...".

Then you need to edit Imakefile or Makefile.openwin, and un-comment the lines
under the comment "To use a separate app-defaults file...". Then, if you are
using Imakefile, do the following:

        xmkmf
        make depend
        make clean
        make

If you are using Makefile.openwin, do the following instead:

        make -f Makefile.openwin clean
        make -f Makefile.openwin

With Makefile.openwin, there is also an extra install step:

        make -f Makefile.openwin install.app-defaults

Note that using a separate app-defaults file is not a supported configuration,
so if you have problems with such an installation, the first question will be,
"Why are you doing it that way?"
