For next public release:
************************

* Remove references to `ltmain.sh' in generated files, because it's
name really is an internal implementation detail.

* Inter-library dependencies should be fully tracked by libtool.
Reminded by Alexandre Oliva.  This requires looking up installed
libtool libraries for transparent support.

* Get rid of the sections that try to change behaviour for GNU ld.  We
really should make our shared library support just depend on the
compiler type.

* Alexandre Oliva suggests that we hardcode paths into libraries, as
well as binaries:  `... -Wl,-soname -Wl,/tmp/libtest.so.0 ...'.

* Tom Lane adds that HP-UX's linker, at least (I've also found this on
AIX 4), distinguishes between global function and global variable
references.  This means that we cannot declare every symbol as `extern
char'.  Find a workaround.

* Maybe show other maintainers my nasty ~/bin/libtool trick.

In the future:
**************

* If not cross-compiling, have the static flag test run the resulting
binary to make sure everything works.

* Implement full multi-language support.  Currently, this is only for
C++, but there are beginnings of this in the manual (Other Languages).
This includes writing libtool not to be so dependent on the compiler
used to configure it.

We especially need this for C++ linking, for which libtool currently
does not handle static constructors properly, even on operating
systems that support them.  ``Don't use static constructors'' is no
longer a satisfactory answer.

People who need it:
  Jean Daniel Fekete <Jean-Daniel.Fekete@emn.fr>
  Thomas Hiller <hiller@tu-harburg.d400.de>

* Another form of convenience library, suggested by Alexandre Oliva,
is to have undocumented utility libraries, where only the shared
version is installed.

* We could use libtool object convenience libraries that resolve
symbols to be included in a libtool archive.  This would require some
sort of -whole-archive option, as well.

* Somehow we need to make sure that static libraries never appear in
$deplibs.  This, will probably require that libtool discover exactly
which files would be linked from which directories when somebody says
`-lsomething'.  This adds a lot of complexity, but I see no other way
around it.

* Need to finalize the documentation, and give a specification of
`.la' files so that people can depend on their format.  This also
needs to be done so that DLD uses a public interface to libtool
archives.  This would be a good thing to put before the maintainance
notes.

Things to think about:
**********************

* Talk with RMS about his so-called `automatic package generation
tool.'  This is probably what Thomas has been murmuring about for the
Hurd.  We'll need to integrate package-supplied programs such as
libtool into that scheme, since it manages some of the preinstall and
postinstall commands, but isn't installed itself.  Probably, things
like libtool should be distributed as part of such a binary package.

* Maybe implement full support for other orthogonal library types
(libhello_g, libhello_p, 64 vs 32-bit ABI's, etc).  Make these types
configurable.

* Add support for windoze DLL's, and maybe other jumptable libs.
Check out Lesstif and Tcl configuration again (maybe they would be
interested in libtool by now?).  The Cygnus win32 project may also be
of value, though it still seems pretty rudimentary right now.
